# Characterizing the Expression Profile of Neural Extracellular Matrix Genes throughout Brain Development

**Problem:** The extracellular matrix (ECM) provides a series of biochemical and biomechanical cues which influence cellular proliferation, differentiation, migration, and maturation throughout brain development. While its role in mediating such key developmental processes has been documented since the early 1900s, relatively little is known of the composition or prevalence of the neural ECM throughout human gestation.  

**Hypothesis:** If the expression of human neural ECM genes mirrors that of murine neural ECM genes, then we expect to observe a distinct temporal shift in expression from larger to smaller chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans (aggrecan, neurocan, versican, brevican), from tenascin-R to tenascin-C, and from high to low levels of hyaluronic acid.

**Objectives:**
* Determine temporal changes in ECM gene expression across human embryonic brain development by analyzing publicly available single cell RNA sequencing data sets. 
* Identify differentially expressed ECM genes in human vs. human induced pluripotent stem cell (hiPSC)-derived models of embryonic brain development by comparing publicly available RNA sequencing data sets.

**Motivation:** The disparity in certain species-specific developmental milestones and our limited access to functional human brain tissues from early developmental stages has led to an emphasis on human-specific, high-throughput, ex vivo cellular investigations into brain development. Driven by the appreciation that cell-based screens represent a more physiological system for high-throughput screening, human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) have emerged as a promising in vitro model system for studying how cells respond to biochemical and biomechanical signals in the developing brain. Elucidating the mechanisms which underlie human neurogenesis and many neurodevelopmental disorders requires first an understanding of how cells respond to these matrix cues. Therefore, understanding the role of the ECM in neurodevelopment will inform the creation of improved models of in vitro human brain development. 

**Previous Research:** Murine strains with single knockouts of individual ECM components often display aberrant long-term potentiation (the process by which synapses, the sites of signal transmission between cells of the nervous system, are strengthened) or embryonic lethality; while in vitro studies of ECM-depleted murine cells, in both monolayer and 3D culture models, display aberrant proliferation, differentiation, migration, and maturation. Such genetic, enzymatic, and small-molecule mediated modifications of the prevalence of distinct ECM molecules have not, to our knowledge, been employed in human models of neurodevelopment. 
